---
numbering:
  title:
    offset: 1
---

# Create a PDF 🌶

**outline**
- Install Typst and confirm availability on CLI
- generate a PDF using default setup (`lapreprint-typst`)
- set up and use `plain_typst_book`
- set up GHA
- play with configuration of website to use PDF


With a general understanding of document creation using MyST and our choice to use Typst for PDF generation, you are ready to create a PDF from your book repository using Jupyter Book.

## Install Typst

::::{tab-set} 
:::{tab-item} Locally
To produce a PDF output locally, you need to have Typst installed on your system. 

````{exercise} Install Typst
Follow [these steps](xref:myst/creating-pdf-documents#typst-install) to install Typst locally.

Check whether Typst is correctly installed by running the following command in your terminal:

```console
typst --version
```

````
:::
:::{tab-item} GitHub Actions
If you are not working locally, you will need to use GHA to generate your PDF. You can proceed through this lesson sequentially, however, skip the steps that ask you to build the PDF using your CLI. Once you have updated your `myst.yml` file to use the `plain_typst_book` you can set up GHA to build and view the PDF.

**WIP**: these instructions need improvement.
:::
::::


## Generate a PDF

:::{exercise} Generate a PDF using the CLI
**WIP**
- generate a PDF using the command line (will use `lapreprint-typst`)
- answer questions (bullet list below)
- look at the output. Can we do better? (yes)

The template is...
The PDF is found...

:::


## Change the PDF template

As seen in the previous exercise, the PDF generated by the `lapreprint-typst` template is not ideal for rendering content designed as a website made with the `book-theme`. Luckily, another Typst template is available: [the Plain Typst Book `plain_typst_book`](https://github.com/myst-templates/plain_typst_book) (not yet listed on the MyST Templates GH Organization). An example YAML snippet that implements this in the `myst.yml` file is illustrated here:

```yaml
  exports:
    - format: typst
      template: https://github.com/myst-templates/plain_typst_book.git
      output: exports/book.pdf
      id: output-pdf
      cover: content/figures/logo.svg
      logo: content/figures/logo.svg
      logo_width: 5
      ToC_depth: 2
```


:::{exercise} Implement the `plain_typst_book` template in your book
**WIP**
change, generate, view output
:::

:::{exercise} Customize the template and regenerate the PDF
visit the repo, read doc, change some features of the template
:::

## PDF output with GH Actions

Building and including your PDF is possible through a GitHub action that automatically builds the PDF when you push changes to GitHub. This has both is pros and cons. For instance, the build of your PDF is done prior to the build of your book, and if there is an error in the workflow your website may not be updated, or the PDF may not be included as a download. On the other hand, you do not need to install anything locally and the PDF is always up to date when you push changes. The workflow steps are:

```yaml
    # Install Typst for PDF generation
    - name: Install Typst
      run: |
        typst --version

    # Build the PDF using Typst
    - name: Build PDF
      run: |
        myst build --typst
```

```{tip} Good practice with PDFs and Git
Don't commit PDF's. Hence the `.gitignore`. Don't let your GHA commit PDF's either (hence the artifact upload, which is shown later).
In fact, PDF generation in GHA is a form of software testing: successful generation of the PDF indicates everything is working properly.
```

:::{exercise} Add PDF generation to GHA workflow
**WIP**
change, view output
:::

## More fun with PDF's

add MyST action button, add download on page.

Upload as artifact (GHA only). This can be done even if the website build fails.
